[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And I'm eminently excited
to bring you a special guest
today.
I'm going to be chatting
with Ira Israel.
My wife Laurentine met
Ira at a spiritual center
in Los Angeles a
number of years ago.
And since then, we've
crossed paths many times.
He is a psychotherapist,
counselor,
and mindfulness
relationship expert,
and he's taught mindfulness
to psychologists,
medical practitioners,
attorneys, everyday people all
around the world.
And he's got a
fantastic book called
"How to Overcome Your Childhood
Now That You're an Adult."
It's a fantastic read,
and it's something
that is very important in
this day and age, I think,
as we start to reflect on how
we've been shaped as a human
and how we can overcome some
of the trauma and challenges
that we may have been exposed
to in our younger years.
Ira.
>> James, thank you
for having me here.
>> I'm excited to chat.
So where I normally start
most conversations is really
around this idea of--
I find that most people
have some form of catalyst
or something that happened
to then that sort of put them
on this trajectory of
being, in your case,
in the mindfulness sort
of space or industry.
How did that start
for you, and what
was this journey like for you?
>> In January of 1985, I was
a passenger in a car accident,
and my face was
blown off my head,
and my femur was
shattered into 200 pieces.
Normally, some of the bone
pierces the femoral artery
and you bleed out in 50 seconds.
And instead, a
doctor was called in.
He was called in
to amputate my leg.
And he said, I just
read this article.
A Swiss doctor named Zichal
has this contraption.
I'm not going to amputate.
I'm going to put him in traction
and put him back together.
So over the next
couple of years,
I started asking, like,
what's the meaning of life,
and why is the world so messed
up, and all these things.
And I went on this journey that
I didn't know I was going on.
It actually took 25 years,
which I'm not proud of.
I feel like a slow learner.
But for the first eight
years, I studied philosophy.
And then in Thailand in '94, I--
again, this is my idiocy.
I walked into a door frame
because I'm tall, right?
And a woman healed
me with her hands.
And so I started thinking,
like, maybe all this philosophy
is kind of misguided.
Maybe there's other things.
So then I started
studying spirituality.
So I studied Buddhism,
Hinduism, Kabbalah.
And then, eight years
later, I started studying--
I was in a relationship.
It was not going swimmingly.
And so I started
studying psychology.
So over those 25 years-- and
I had gone to film school,
and I had gone to
yoga teacher training.
I got into meditation.
And then all of a sudden,
I was teaching yoga
at Rodney Yee's yoga studio
and a woman walked in
and she put her hands down.
And I don't know how insane this
sounds, but I heard a voice.
And it said, OK,
it's time to teach.
Like, you've been
indulgent for 25 years.
You've been just
studying all this stuff.
Now it's time to give back.
And it's really interesting,
because during those 25 years,
if you looked at my
life from the outside,
you'd be like, oh
yea, the poor soul.
He's in an ashram in India
or he's in a cafe in Paris
or-- like, you know, it wasn't
a terrible life, but it was--
there was no, like, central
focus other than, like, Ira
indulgently
questioning everything.
And then, right from
that point in time,
I put an ad on Craigslist.
I hired a cinematographer
and a director
and I made "Yoga for
Depression and Anxiety."
It became a bestseller
three months later,
and then I made "Mindfulness
for Depression."
I made "Mindfulness
for Anxiety."
And then it everything collapsed
into this, like, perfect--
this is who you're
supposed to be.
So it's fascinating
to me because I see--
when I have patients in my
office now, when they come in,
I can kind of get a feel--
like, oh yeah,
that was me when I
was at the beginning or the
middle or kind of the end.
And something will
come together.
We don't know what it
is, but the universe
will give you
information, and then
you'll become who
you're supposed to be.
It's really interesting
because I study
how your mind represses things.
And then they come up
at different times.
But the repressions--
you know, what
Freud said about repressions--
whatever's repressed
comes back thricefold.
So I've worked hard in therapy
and with plant medicine
and with shamans and
healers and things
so that I've integrated
the pain, because somebody
told me--
you remember certain things
from being in the hospital.
Someone told me that the most
painful thing a woman can
experience is
natural childbirth,
and the most painful
experience a man can experience
is a femur broken.
It takes a piano from
five stories dropped down.
Your femur's the largest
bone in your body.
It's the strongest thing.
And so the top of
mine was just--
it was just fragments, pieces.
And I obviously was
in a lot of pain.
But there was, you know--
and I'll tell you an
interesting story.
15 years later, I was
in a yoga class, right?
And I went to this gentleman.
I'm not going to name his name.
But people will know who he
is when I tell the story.
So I had moved to Santa Barbara
to study Buddhism and Hinduism.
And people said, you got
to do yoga with this guy.
You gotta do yoga with this guy.
So I go to this class,
and I'm a hardcore purist
about everything.
And so after about 20 minutes,
the guy shuts off the lights
and he plays "I Will
Survive," and he
says, "Dance on your mat."
And I was not open to
that, and I just, like--
I rolled up my mat and left.
I was like, that
guy's a weirdo, man.
I'm not into that
California bullshit.
Like, I want to do yoga, man.
You know, I was
just, like, crazy.
So like a year and
a half later, I
was like, OK, people are
saying, you got to go back.
He doesn't do that all time.
You got to go back.
And I went back.
And he remembered
me from walking out.
And he had asked at
the beginning of class,
does anyone have any injuries?
And I told him about my
injuries and whatnot.
So it's two years later, right?
I'm in Pigeon Pose
on the left side.
The guy hasn't touched
me all class, right?
He's my size, 200 pounds.
He comes over.
My leg's in front
of me like this.
He puts his weight on my back,
and he whispers in my ear,
"I remember that you have an
issue with your left leg."
And I snapped back into the car
screaming, "Don't let me die.
I don't want to die."
And so your mind--
I was saying that to
a paramedic, you know?
And that's, like,
the glimpse I have
of the week that's been
repressed where someone drilled
a hole through my
leg and other people
were putting things in here and
putting my face back together
and doing all this stuff.
But, you know,
it's not a contest.
Maybe it's stupid
for me to say I
experienced this terrible pain.
I'm with patients every day,
and I cry about their traumas
more than I--
or as much as I cry
about my traumas.
This is life, you know?
We want to be loved.
We don't have good tools.
Things happen, and
it's very traumatizing.
And the best we can do is
nurture our own resilience so
that we can show up and
have some understanding
and create a narrative and
transmute our own suffering
into making the
world a better place
by not doing the
natural thing of paying
our suffering forward, by
showing up in a way and saying,
no, my mind is telling me
to go and hurt that person.
And instead, I'm
going to forgive them.
I want that person
to have a great life.
>> Yeah, that's awesome.
Can we stay a little bit on
the story of this car crash,
because it seems like a
big sort of point for you
in your journey.
After that crash happened--
so you had this leg issue.
You also talk about the face,
and it went through, and then
what are some of the
emotions that you
went through sort of in
the first immediate years
after that?
>> The thing that was most
transformational was that--
so I would go out for years
after, and people would say,
hey, how'd you get
that scar on your face?
Or it'd be like I'd be out
at some place or I even--
I'll never forget.
Some woman came up
to me in a bar once.
She said, what happened
to your face, you know?
And people-- and I
meet them all time,
people who have facial scars.
It's very traumatizing
because that's
your facade to the world.
You're like this is your person.
And mine was-- it took
five different surgeries
to put it back together so that
I have some kind of semblance
of a normal smile.
I'm very fortunate to have
not had my teeth blown out.
So I always would
say, kind of proudly,
I was almost killed
in a car accident.
So for about 25
years until I started
getting more and more into
compassion and Buddhism
and things like that--
and finally, I took
a course, and you had
to tell the story of your life.
And someone said, OK,
what happened here?
And I said, I was almost
killed in a car accident.
And there was a
gentleman who was tasked
with deconstructing the story.
And so I said, I was almost
killed in a car accident.
He goes, no, you weren't.
And I said, well, actually,
my femur was shattered.
My face was blown off my head.
They didn't notify my
parents because they didn't
think I was going to live.
Trust me, I was almost
killed in a car accident.
He goes, no, you weren't.
We went back and forth.
And then, finally, he says,
there was a car accident.
Everything else you added.
You can't be almost pregnant.
You can't be almost dead.
You're either alive or dead.
There was a car accident.
So language creates reality.
The way you choose
to frame your life--
and you're either the
hero of your story
or you're the victim.
And for those first 25 years,
I realized in that instant
that I was sucking
people into my drama,
trying to get them
to be empathetic,
and I just made a
conscious choice, like, no.
So when people ask me now, it's
like, there was a car accident.
Language creates reality.
I mean, really we have to
be impeccable in the words
that we choose
because we're trying
to cultivate authentic
love, and you can't do
that if you're just a facade.
>> That was probably one of the
most profound parts of the book
of yours that I read,
this realization that you
weren't almost killed.
Like, you can't almost
be pregnant, right?
You can't almost be killed.
You're either alive or dead.
It's like, I was in a car
accident or even positive--
I survived a car
accident would be even
more of a positive spin on it.
>> Yeah.
>> And there was
also this part--
I don't mean to labor on this.
We'll get to more things.
But you actually looked up the
gentleman that was with you.
So this was in
your teens, right?
So if you could
mention that as well.
So you were 18 at the
time or something, or 19.
And so at that age, I mean, I've
been in cars with 18-year-olds.
People drive like losers.
You know, you've
got your feet pushed
through the bottom of the floor
because you're like, slow down,
slow down, buddy, you know?
And so to go back and apologize
to someone, first of all,
or to find them--
you know, difficult. But
then to muster up the courage
to do that and to
do it authentically
and to really make
peace with that is huge.
Tell me that process.
So how old were you?
Like, what went
through your mind?
And then how much later
was it when you finally
reconciled this?
>> So I had been
studying compassion,
and the term that I use
in the book is at onement
or atonement, and the
key tool is forgiveness.
So I took a compassion
workshop, and it was fascinating
because I had been having--
I'll be frank here.
If during the first 25 years
after the car accident--
this is so embarrassing--
if someone had said, I'm sorry,
you have pancreatic cancer,
you're going to
die in two months--
I had this vengeance fantasy
of going to find this driver
and doing to his face
what happened to mine.
And I would find myself,
like, in the middle
of the night sometimes just
having these horrible--
you know, like, the
world isn't just
and this whole terrible thing.
And there was something
that Fred Luskin, who
wrote "Forgive
for Good--" he was
speaking about these topics.
And so I went home from
the conference that night,
and I wrote a letter to the
guy, the driver of the car.
And I just put it away.
I didn't mean to
send it or anything.
And then I woke up the next
morning, and I read it,
and I was just like,
let me check out
what's on the internet.
So I googled him,
found him on Facebook,
and I set up a second
Ira Israel account
so he would see
it's me, but I just
didn't want him to see my
whole life or anything.
And I sent the letter.
I just told them what I'd done
for those 25 years and things
that I was feeling and
whatnot, and I went to work.
And I came home.
It was probably, like,
6 o'clock at night.
And I was like, OK, let me check
this other Facebook account.
And lo and behold, I received
an equally long letter.
It was very-- and I
started to read it,
and it was really heartfelt.
And it's surprising to everybody
when you show up
in a certain way.
Like, I can't tell you,
James, be vulnerable, right?
But if I show up
in a certain way,
I can inspire you or enroll you.
So I don't know how much
personal work this person
had done over the past
25 years or something.
But he showed up
like a gentleman.
And we went back and forth for
a week talking about our lives.
And at the end of the week, he
had told me how sorry he was.
And for some reason I
just felt compelled,
and I just wrote
in all capitals,
"If it helps you in any
way, I forgive you."
And I closed the account,
and I deleted the account,
and I never had any of those
machinations or anything.
Like, all-- like, it's just--
it was the wildest thing.
It's just, like, all
of the negativity.
You know?
And that's why in the book
I talk about this irony--
because your mind was built to
create resentments-- woulda,
coulda, shoulda, didn'ts.
And those are the
things that show up
as the causes of suffering,
because you're trying
to change the unchangeable.
I can't go back to
1985, and if I did,
something worse might
have happened, right?
But your mind is this incredible
machine that looks at the past
and says, wow, that
was really traumatic.
I'm never going to
let that happen again.
I'm going to lift weights or
I'm going to be this person
or I'm going to get
rich or I'll show them
and you do this
whole crazy thing.
And you-- I wanted to write
a book about authenticity
because I felt
that we become what
we love and we become what we
hate and both are inauthentic.
So there's a part
of us that wants
to be loved by our parents
and the people around us.
So we emulate.
We imitate them.
If they're, you know--
and then there's
this part that is trying
to individuate and become
our own selves.
So we get tattoos,
and we have long hair,
or we buy-- if they
have a German car,
we buy an American
car, you know?
And so there's this conflict,
I feel, in all of us
that we want to be loved,
but we want to be our own--
we want to have our own agency.
And forgiveness is
a huge part of that.
There's a beautiful
quote by Lily Tomlin
that I quote in the book.
"Forgiveness means giving up all
hope of having a better past."
So your mind does
this incredible thing
where it's constantly trying
to, like, rewrite your history.
And you're only causing
your own suffering
because it's like trying to jam
a square peg into a round hole.
You can't change the past.
And yet, if you're out
there and you're like, well,
I'll show them that they
shouldn't have mistreated me
because I'll be famous and
I'll be rich and I'll do these
things, you'll get there and
then you'll realize that those
people don't--
you don't exist to them.
So you've lived your whole life
for this inauthentic reason,
like, this vengeance fairy tale
or this, like, I'll show them.
So I really hope that, in
my classes and in the book
and on the DVDs, that
I inspire people just
to question their whys,
why they're doing things,
and then realize that
there is a set of tools
available to keep us at the high
end of our happiness spectrums.
The only thing that correlates
strongly with happiness
is the quality of our
intimate relationships,
how we connect
with other people.
Money-- nobody wants worked
really hard on their tombstone.
And yet, if we go across
the street right now,
there'll be kids in
cafes with earbuds
on just thinking that
they're working really hard--
and so this whole American
fiction of, like, homeownership
and going into debt
and all these things
that keep people amped up
and in fight or flight mode
and not sleeping well and then
eventually cancer or depression
or these things.
We really have to just
sit down and question
all the underlying
systems in our culture
and see which ones are
bringing out the best in us
and making us compassionate,
loving, authentic human beings.
>> I agree.
It's a big system to unravel.
Before we jump to
this depression
and our modern landscape of
everything that we've created,
which I really want
to get to, I want
to stay for a little bit
on this topic of sort
of the primary caregivers and
how they can impact your life.
So you talk about how when we're
young, we do a lot of things
to get love and approval.
And then when we're
older, we sort of wonder
why we're doing things or
what's the best thing we should
do in our life, and
we're questioning,
how can we be authentic?
Also, maybe we could talk
about if you've grown up
or if people have grown
up in an environment that
is being potentially abusive
or with a narcissistic parent
or with a split
personality or bipolar
parent, what experiences
they may have had as a child,
how they would have
coped with that,
and then as you
get into adulthood,
how do you start
to heal or unravel
some of the trauma that could
have happened in that time
and make sense of your life
now that you're an adult?
>> Awesome.
So when you hold a baby up to a
mirror, its eyes go like this.
And the reason is
because it has no self.
So we are creatures of language,
and there's this individuation
process where a baby
finally is like,
you know, looking at
the mirror and then
finally looking at the mother
and realizing that it's not
at one with the mother.
And we individuate in
America very abruptly.
Science says-- medicine
says that breastfeeding
for 18 months is optimum.
I was born in 1966.
And the doctors went
to my parents and said,
we have this chemical
formula that's
superior to mother's milk.
So there's a whole
swath of people
who were never breastfed.
And I think that correlates to
our poor attachment dynamics
later in life because we're
interdependent beings.
And if you are put down as
a baby and allowed to-- you
know, they allow babies to
cry themselves out, right?
And it's essentially
the baby assimilates
that as you're killing me.
Like, I can't survive alone.
And you're like, don't worry,
we'll be back in eight hours.
But the baby doesn't
speak English.
So the baby's just thinking,
like, I'm dying, right?
And they cry itself
out until it sleeps.
But the problem is
that when you're
fired 35 years
later from your job
or when your boyfriend or
girlfriend cheats on you,
it reopens the primal
abandonment wound.
So my main interest
is how people
feel betrayed by
their own parents,
because it's all babies want
is to be loved unconditionally.
That's all they want.
They want to be safe.
They want to be held.
They want to be fed.
They want to be cleaned, right?
And in our culture--
you know, I have friends
who send their kids
to these schools
at two years old.
And they're like, yeah, they
have a really high acceptance
rate for Harvard.
And I'm like, your kid
wants to play with clay.
Your kid is not concerned about
going to Harvard in 16 years.
Like, why are you putting
all this pressure, you know?
So there's a component of
our highly competitive brand
of capitalism, which has
influenced parenting.
And the other thing, as
I mentioned in our book,
parenting comes in
waves, ebbs and flows.
So after World War
II, what I noticed
was that parents
were really afraid
of the Cold War of Russia,
bombing, another Hitler.
They lived through all
this terrible stuff.
And so I find that a lot of
people in that generation
were emotionally withholding
and they had these conceptions
that if our kids become
doctors and lawyers,
then when the second Hilter
comes, we'll be ready.
They just had this whole
other thing happening.
And I also say in the book-- and
I'll say this right upfront--
you know, we have
to say, our parents
did the best that they could
with the tools that they had.
If you're walking around
blaming your parents,
you're only hurting
yourself, right?
They did the best
that they could.
Now, the irony is, if
parents want to really help
the growth of their children,
at some point in time,
they should say
something like this--
we could have done better.
So there's this-- like,
that's fascinating to me
that, for us, we have to
always say my parents did
the best that they could.
And the other thing that I
always take into account--
and I don't know how this
will go over, but it's karma.
I mean, if you
believe in karma, then
you chose those people, right?
So that to me really helps.
I'll ask people-- if they
come in and they're just like,
this terrible thing happened,
and my father did this, my
mother did this, I'm like, OK.
When-- after it's all
over, I'll be like,
so why did your soul--
what did your soul
need to learn that they chose
to be incarnated by these two
people?
>> So you think part of the
process of deciphering meaning
out of having potentially
abusive parents is to question
in retrospect, what was I here
to learn from that experience?
>> Well, as I
mentioned in the book,
as we spoke about before--
so his holiness the Dalai Lama I
sat with at various conferences
and things, and
people say, you know,
who's your greatest teacher?
And as the spokesperson
for Buddhism in the West,
the answer has to be the
Buddha is my greatest teacher.
And what does he say?
The Chinese-- who bludgeoned
with ax handles two million
of his followers, right?
And that's his greatest teacher.
So for me, owning your life
means reframing it to say,
OK, I'm here today.
I'm safe.
Yes, my face was blown
off my head 33 years ago.
Yes, I had this
kind of relationship
with my parents or this
person or this was humiliating
or this or something.
But instead of fighting
reality, a reality
that you can't
change, the sooner
you own it is the
sooner you'll let
go of all those resentments.
And those resentments
are now the adage
from the 12-step program.
Resentment is like poking
yourself in the eye
and waiting for your
parents to go blind.
Resentment is like
drinking poison and waiting
for your older brother, who
kicked your ass every day,
to get sick.
He's not going to get sick.
You're only poisoning yourself.
So you have to forgive
all these people
and say they did
the best they could.
And listen, I know it's a hard
pill to swallow, you know?
It took me 25 years.
It's just like-- and when
the trauma is really close--
I know of a few people
who knew they were going
to be assaulted, and
they spoke to the person
who was about to do harm to
them and forgave them then.
But those people are a lot
more sophisticated than I am.
>> Yeah, I mean, I
think the Dalai Lama--
I mean, that's incredible.
For him to say something
like that is profound,
and I think it takes
someone like that
to say something like that.
Thanks for that.
I think we covered
that quite well.
>> I'll just-- one other thing.
So again, my whole
interest is consciousness
and the human mind.
I think that our primary desire
is to be loved unconditionally.
And we grew up in
this crazy society
which only gives us tools
to gain love conditionally.
So we're actually in this
giant resentment factory
because we can never have
what our hearts crave, right?
And I studied this
psychiatrist who
says that language,
even just talking,
estranges us from the
real phenomenon of being.
And that's really an
interesting concept,
because in America, Sonja
Lyubomirsky, who lives down
the street, she wrote a
book, "The How of Happiness,"
and she talks about
the Hedonic treadmill.
So all the things
that were taught
by social media and the
media that will make us happy
actually make us miserable.
And ironically, I
live in a culture
with the inalienable
right to pursue happiness.
And that is the worst
thing ever, right?
You cannot pursue happiness.
It's not-- it's a ramification.
Happiness is a byproduct.
So what you need to
do is sleep correctly,
have loving relationships,
eat well, get some exercise.
It's not brain surgery.
And yet 100 million
prescriptions
for antidepressants are
written in this country
of 330 million people.
22 million Americans take
antidepressants every day,
and I don't think it's
some rogue gene that
just afflicts Americans.
I think we need to look
at our school system.
We have to look at this
nuclear family or the
being raised by a
single mom or single dad
and then working 80 hours a
week and being proud of it.
I mean, this is an insane
time we're living in.
All of us have our phones.
Some of the times
they're under our pillows
I don't know anyone who
doesn't go to the bathroom
without an iPad or
something in there.
I mean, can you just have
those five minutes of,
like, you know, a little just--
it's crazy, right?
If aliens came down
and looked at--
just they went into
Abbot Kinney where
you were yesterday
in Intelligentsia
and looked at everyone
with their sunglasses on
and their iPods--
no one's looking at each other.
You can't say anything.
They're frowning.
They're like-- they're
paying $8 for coffee.
I mean, like, none of
this makes sense, right?
I mean-- and we do it every day.
>> Yeah.
You're right.
I mean, we've designed--
OK, maybe a deeper question.
I don't know if you're
willing to answer this.
This system we designed
around education--
primary education,
secondary, college, whatever
we call it between countries--
this capitalistic consumerist
society and this produced GDP,
produced economic output at
any cost-- think about it.
We measure a company--
a country's success
on GDP, right?
>> Which is a fiction.
>> True.
And--
>> It has no
correlation to anything.
>> No.
But if there's a mother at
home looking after a child,
there's no economic
output for that.
If she goes back
into the workforce
and puts her child in daycare,
it's a double economic output.
There's money going
into the daycare.
There's money
coming from the job.
>> One of the greatest
contributing factors to GDP is
car accidents.
There's really
terrible things that
contribute to our
domestic product
in terms of, like, things
being destroyed and ambulances
and all the billion
dollar industries--
I'm sure pornography.
Like, there's-- like, GDP
is a stupid measurement.
It's funny because there was
a debate last Friday night
between Slavoj Zizek, the
philosopher, and Jordan
Peterson.
And it's-- the problem I see
now is that we're not having
the right conversations.
When you have people
arguing about GDP
and how this is
happening and there's
been this type of growth,
you're not on the ground
sitting there with the
workers from Walmart or Amazon
who don't have health
insurance who are on welfare.
I mean, we have these
bullshit statistics
that people use to
buttress arguments
so that the rich get richer
and the poor get poorer.
But really we need
equality of opportunity
so that people have a fair
shot of going to college.
They don't have to
bribe their way in,
like we've just had all
these terrible scandals here.
But, really, Jewish
people were not
allowed at Harvard
University until the 1920s.
That's 300 years.
We have terrible misogyny.
We have terrible racism.
This country is just
full of hypocrites.
I mean, and it's the best
country in the world.
I mean, I live here.
I could live any place.
I live here.
I enjoy the freedoms, free
speech, things like that.
But if you really look
at the systems in place,
the myth of romantic
love and the money
swirling around
marriages and divorces,
I mean, these are
businesses, man.
There's a lot of money, right?
And then all the heartbreak--
and then people like me,
psychotherapists,
marriage counselors,
who people sign up for life.
I mean, I make the
joke in the book.
I said, marriage for
life was a fantastic idea
in the 13th century when
people lived to be 28.
But now that we're
living until 87,
we should have renewable
marriage contracts.
On your anniversary, you
should sit down and say, well,
what'd you like this year?
What didn't you like?
OK, I can do better.
I'll sign on again, right?
If you have a kid--
18 years.
These are just
commonsensical things.
But we live on this whole
other paradigm of Christianity,
marriage for life,
and we really need
to rethink our government,
the way we're interacting,
and our work-life balance.
>> True.
I agree.
There was an acronym you
mentioned in the book,
and I think it was--
>> WEIRD.
What does that stand for?
And what does it mean?
And maybe, if you
want to riff on this,
how did we get into
this area of these goals
that we're all
striving for and how
we're sort of missing the
happiness boat because of that?
So the first, the acronym,
what does it stand for?
What is it?
>> Ironically, we live in
a society that could be
identified by the acronym WEIRD.
We're Western, educated,
industrialized, rich,
and democratic.
Now, the interesting
thing in terms of the DSM,
the Diagnostic Statistical
Manual of Disorders,
is that we inflict our diagnoses
on the rest of the world.
But, actually, WEIRD
populations are only 12%
of the entire world society.
So the reason I like to
talk about these things
is because Thomas Kuhn
in 1968 wrote a book
and talked about paradigm
shifting every 25 years.
So if you look at the DSM, there
was a "New York Times" article
about 13 years ago that stated
that 56% of the psychiatrist
who wrote for the
DSM had taken money
from pharmaceutical companies.
So there's this component.
And I'm not going into some
kind of conspiracy theory.
I'm just saying that people
benefit from other people being
diagnosed.
So as a psychotherapist,
I avoid diagnoses
because those labels
confine people.
And people get into
this whole thing
where I feel they're
terribly disempowered.
If you say, oh yeah,
my mother is bipolar
and her mother is bipolar
and everyone's bipolar
so I have to be on these
medications, that's
very disempowering.
There's no solution
but that pill.
For me, if you say, yeah, I'm
a human being and occasionally
I have these emotions
that are highly unpleasant
and I'm going to try to
find a solution to that
that is not some kind of pill--
and listen, I work
with schizophrenics.
I work with severely
challenged people,
and they need to be medicated,
too, so that they don't do harm
to themselves or other people
or can function in society.
However, not everybody
who just wants to--
like, these kids today,
they're on ADHD medication.
They have this game
that they play.
And it's really
our school system.
Our school system was
developed to make workers.
Not everybody needs to study
chemistry, and yet in America
everyone studies chemistry.
Not everyone should be studying
art if you need to be this.
And we just force
these kids, and then
if they don't like the
stuff that they're studying,
we dope them up on this,
like, cocaine-like substance,
this amphetamine, you know?
And I have these
kids in my office,
and they can play
this trick on doctors.
They go into the doctor office.
They're like, I find
myself looking out
the window in blank class.
And the doctor just--
there was this article
where, like, doctors were
seeing patients, kids, for seven
minutes and just
prescribing ADHD medication.
And then the kids
can't sleep, and then
there's this whole
cycle of craziness,
and they start really young,
like, 7, 8, 9 years old.
They don't need medication.
These kids need hugs.
They need to go play baseball.
They need to play with dolls.
And we live in this culture
that's so competitive.
It's a win or take all
society, and everybody
wants to be Bill Gates
or Angelina Jolie
or somebody who's on a
kiosk, but they don't really,
because you don't want to have
Asperger's like Bill Gates,
and you don't want to have a
double mastectomy like Angelina
Jolie.
You just want to have her $400
million or his $36 billion.
But if we explain to people
that doesn't make you happier,
you just have a different
set of problems.
Bill-- there was an
article last week.
Mark Zuckerberg last
year spent $22 million
to not have his family
harmed, $22 million.
You could feed a small country
in Africa for that money.
He can't go to Intelligentsia.
He can't go out of the house.
He can't do anything.
There's a militia
around Bill Gates.
When Bill Gates goes some
place to speak, it's like--
there's this whole-- the bomb
sweeping and all this crazy
stuff.
And then you look
at these kids today.
What do you want to
do when you grow up?
I want to be Bill Gates.
No, you don't.
You don't want to
have a militia.
You want to go walk on the
beach and jump in the ocean.
You don't want to
have 50 guys with guns
strapped all over them so
that you can get an ice cream.
>> Right?
Right?
I think one of the really--
one of the most profound
things that happened to me when
I'm young-- and I'm so
grateful for all the
experiences in my
life, and I feel
that I've been given
mentors in my life
to teach me about
experiences very early on.
And Laurentine's godfather
was a big mentor of mine,
big in Siddhi Yoga.
And his message he
got from the guru
was multifaceted,
that one was, if you
see duality, laugh at it.
Experience oneness
in everything.
And be grateful for this life.
That was his three boons.
Super profound.
Then another gentleman
in a similar sort of--
he was also involved in
the same lineage of yoga--
was taught this message.
And I sort of--
I've stolen both of their
messages for myself--
borrowed, should we say.
Everything is absolutely
always unfolding perfectly,
not for a reason, good or bad.
That was-- this happened
for that reason.
That was bad, you know?
But that everything
is absolutely always
unfolding perfectly.
So it's perfection
in everything.
That's really helped me move
faster through trauma or issues
because I'm like, what is
seeking to emerge from this?
What is the perfection
I also worked for two
of the wealthiest people
in the world, one involved in a
similar company, the person you
just mentioned.
I used to drive
their private yacht.
I mean, that was a
previous career of mine.
And what I learned is that
money doesn't make you healthy,
and money doesn't
make you happy.
So why have we got all these
goals that we're aiming for?
And they're ultimately
not good goals.
Like, I live also in a
developing country called
Vanuatu, and Vanuatu
actually placed
number one on the Happy Person
Index, the HPI, in 2016.
>> Congratulations.
>> Yeah, thank you.
>> So what do you think it is?
>> I'm a resident.
I'm not a national
of that country.
>> They only polled James.
>> Yeah, no.
I was not living
there at the time.
But if-- I think Bhutan was one
of the first winners, right?
And then it's been tracked,
and people question the index.
But still they're trying to
measure some form of happiness.
So they won in 2016, and
it is just almost comical
how happy they are.
And you'll be driving to
school in the morning,
and there's a pickup
truck in front,
and they're all standing in
the back, all these guys,
laughing and singing.
Then it rains.
And they're getting drenched.
And it's 6:30, 7
o'clock in the morning.
And they're singing,
and they're laughing,
and a friend will jump off the
truck and nearly trip over,
and they laugh, and
they're laughing.
They're all high fiving.
They're just ecstatic.
These guys live in a
shared home, like, eight
or 10 other people.
They own next to nothing.
They maybe go to
church or some religion
or some form of
meditation or practice
towards some higher
power once a week.
They respect each other.
They have a chief system.
They have no poverty
in their country
because everyone has food
and shelter because you're
a chief system and there's
food growing everywhere.
They're so happy.
And then I fly in and
out of that country
to, like, LA, New York,
packed European cities
with this congestion
issue and immigration.
Then I go to Australia, which
is also amazing but also stuck
under this whole rule of,
like, own your own home.
That's the Australian dream.
And people are stressed out,
putting their kids in daycare.
Even though it's a free and
happy country like America,
it's still there's this
oppressive sort of systems that
are just driving
us down, and you've
got this country stuck
in the middle of nowhere,
happy as Larry.
>> Yeah.
>> Why?
How?
What's going on?
And how do we solve
these problems?
>> Again, I don't want to go
into somewhat of intentional
conspiracy theory.
But what's manifested since
the 1950s when America was
primarily a middle-class
society is that--
and I hope that you got this
from my book-- but power
corrupts.
And the four-- the founding
fathers of our society
didn't take that into account.
So every system has been
corrupted by the people
on top for their own benefit--
I mean, our taxation system,
the school system, the board
of directors, all these--
of companies and
things like that.
And we need to figure out--
it's been really fascinating
to watch people say, you know,
I want a free market society.
And as I say in the book,
a free market society
means that you say, here, you
want to buy these carrots,
and I stab you in the
neck and take the carrots.
That's a free market.
But we have regulations against
murder, against robbery,
against all these things.
And we've become
anti-authoritarian
in our culture.
For America, it's been
since Ronald Reagan.
Big government.
Government's bad, you know?
I mean, I tell people, if you
don't like big government,
don't live in a country with
330 million people and 300
million guns because someone's
got to protect us from those--
that situation because
it's not tenable.
It's not sustainable
because people get angry
and they shoot their
guns, you know?
So for me we have to figure
out a way to account for this--
I don't know what to call it--
because it's not an aberration.
When you become WEIRD, rich
like this, there's this envy.
There's this craziness
where you always project--
like with social media,
you measure your insides
by other people's outsides.
So you see them and you're
like, wow, they're happy
and they're smoking crack.
Like, I should smoke crack.
Or they have a Bentley
or they do whatever.
And you just-- your mind
does this crazy stuff.
So then for me what
I teach i s have
to be able to cultivate
non-reactivity, which
we do through meditation,
and understand
that your mind was devised
to give you bad information.
But it starts with wanting
to be loved unconditionally.
And then your mind--
the way it reacts to
traumas when you're a kid,
it's twofold.
Firstly, it says, wow,
that was humiliating.
I will never let
that happen again.
I'm going to do this.
And then you are this thing,
this facade, this persona
for the next 70 years.
And what I tell
people in the classes
is whatever persona
you developed
to help you survive
your childhood
and get your emotional
and psychological needs
met when you were seven
or eight, fantastic.
Whatever it was, if
you were the cool guy,
if you were the jock,
if you were the--
whatever you were, it's great.
But now that you're 35, I
bet that those same qualities
are hindering you from getting
the authentic love that you
really crave.
So there's an irony there.
So at some point
in time after you
realize that you've become
what you love from your parents
and caregivers and you've become
what you hate, the opposite--
to individuate-- you
have to pull yourself up
by your own bootstraps and
say, this is who I want to be.
And you have to realize
that that's a luxury.
There's been people who
don't have enough food
or who are running from tigers
and doing all this crazy stuff,
and you live in this Western
industrialized country
where you're like, I
want to fly to the moon.
I want to make a record.
I want to paint.
I want to do these things.
And that's a privilege.
And so you have to really
cultivate gratitude, cultivate
non-reactivity, and
be able to show up
in the present moment
as love so that you
attract that from other people.
You can't just, as I said,
say, James, be vulnerable,
be loving, you know?
The best you can do is inspire
them to be their highest self
by you showing up that way.
>> That's so beautiful.
And I really-- I play
with that a little bit.
I play with the
gratitude process a lot,
I mean, because--
one of-- someone I
met a long time ago.
And I've interviewed,
fortunately,
hundreds and hundreds of
people who I look up to,
yourself included.
And one of them said, turn your
have-to's into a get-to, right?
Not many people get the
opportunity to start a company
or do this or that.
It's like, whoa,
I get to do that.
You look-- 90%--
or 88% of the world
is not a WEIRD,
a Western, industrialized, rich,
educated, democratic country
of people-- group of people.
They're just living day to day.
But then their happiness
is generally higher.
So their gratefulness
is that they got up,
that they survived, that
they had a meal, you know?
Our gratefulness is, like,
well, where's my paycheck?
Where's my 401(k)
retirement plan?
>> Well, because we've
been fooled and--
I'm so sorry to interrupt.
But we've been fooled into
this system that has told us--
they've given us these signals
that if you have this big house
you will be happy.
If you have this beautiful
wife, you'll be happy.
If you make two kids and
send them to this school,
you'll be happy.
And what I feel is the
midlife crisis in America
is really this overwhelming
sense of betrayal,
because I have friends
who did all those things,
they accomplished
all those goals,
and they're not happy, right?
And so then they start to do
the materials, the things.
They buy a Porsche.
They get a mistress.
They go to Vegas or whatever,
and that doesn't work either.
And then they have to figure
out, like, OK, what am I doing?
I did everything right.
That didn't make me happy.
I have to really sit
down and figure this out
at 40 years old.
I have to-- you know?
And it's a really--
it's a conundrum that we live
in this society with all these
freedoms and we're--
America's always, like, 12th
or 19th on the happiness scale.
And as I mentioned,
all the people who are
on pharmaceuticals, who take
these medications every morning
just to get through
their day, and they're--
we're so-- 3.5 billion
people live on $1.90 a day.
None of those people--
I just came from Erewhon
with the $8 coffee,
and it's like it's Burning Man.
Everyone's just
so rich in there.
You look at the prices.
It's insane.
And you have to
think to yourself,
yeah, 25% of these people took
anti-depressants this morning,
you know?
What?
Really?
And you're-- who sleep in a bed
with nine other people or who
share meals--
like, I see kids in their
cars eating on the way.
They're on the phone.
They got a latte
and the earbuds.
And I'm like, you're going
to kill somebody and end up
in jail because you're
trying to be so productive.
But happiness is
not in productivity.
Happiness is, like,
I'm here with you.
Like, I want to be
with other people.
We're interdependent.
We need to really learn
how to break bread.
And in America,
we've just eradicated
the basic fundamental
emotional needs,
and then we diagnose
these people as whatever
and give them pills.
So for me, we need an inversion
of our political and economic
systems.
And as we were
discussing earlier--
you know, TS Eliot
wrote in the '40s,
does it end with a
bang or a whimper?
And I thought, like, Obama
would be the whimper.
We're going to another
society, right?
My country is $22
trillion in debt.
All of my friends and
I are beneficiaries
through mortgages, credit
card, and school loans.
We're beneficiaries.
Like, we've authorized
our government
to do this massive Ponzi scheme
on the rest of the fucking
planet so that we can
live high on the hog.
And I don't know.
I don't know what's
going to happen.
Is there going to
be a revolution?
Is China going to say we don't
want to loan you money anymore?
Like, what's going to happen?
But people like you
and I, hopefully, we're
team transition.
We're here so when all these
buildings, all the light
goes off and there's
no electricity
and there's no heat,
we can figure out,
oh yeah, I read about
this in the book.
This is how you make a
fire from two sticks.
I think we can
survive this week,
because in America
everyone's just
thinking, like, oh,
I want a Ferrari
and then I want a Lamborghini
and I want this stuff
and I want this more stuff
and I want-- no one's happy.
So I don't know.
I feel like the Earth is this--
Gaia is this
mechanism, and humanity
killing a billion pigs, a
billion cows, and the way
that they're slaughtered, what
we've done to the oceans--
like, we could be
hemorrhaged off of our planet
because we've been
so deleterious.
We've caused so much harm.
And it's in our interpersonal
relationships with each other.
It's not even that
this person is--
what happened in
Sri Lanka yesterday.
I mean, it's Easter and
seven guys go into churches
and blow themselves up
and kill 207 people.
I mean, I have nothing--
it's just so-- it's--
I want to say it's embarrassing.
It's embarrassing that
we're human beings
and we allow other
human beings to think
that this is an activity
that they should partake in.
How did that happen that
we're just so misguided?
>> Yeah, it is shocking.
I don't know that
we can go there.
That's a big discussion.
I probably think where
we could transition too--
what you touched on earlier--
is talking about this
happiness conundrum
and how we want all this,
but then we're not happy.
And you quickly brushed
over a few practical steps
that we can take.
So maybe let's focus on
that a little bit more.
Like, gratitude practice,
what does it look like?
How do we do that?
Meditation, what
does it look like?
How do you teach it?
What is that like?
What other practices
are there that, I guess,
are all-encompassing in terms
of trauma, happiness, whatever?
They seem to be something
that you just recommend
as broad strokes for people.
What-- how do these
practical applications
of consciousness or
awareness or authenticity
and how do they work?
>> So knowing how
the mind operates--
and I'm very privileged.
In my office, when
patients walk out,
there's these big billboards for
Hulu and all these companies.
But there's also some kind
of home across the street,
and there's always a kind
of a homeless person that
had their leg amputated
or some kind of person who
has to live in an
assisted living facility.
And it's interesting
because our minds look up.
But if you want to
compare yourself,
you could just as easily compare
yourself, particularly me--
and when I see the
guy across street
in the wheelchair
with one leg, my mind
is like, that could be me.
I don't look up and see some
celebrity in a sports car
and say, that could be me,
but a lot of people do.
And that's what media and
social media teaches you.
It teaches you to--
if I work hard, I can
be the next whoever.
No.
Accept who you are today.
And yeah, you can try to
make your life better,
but know the things that are
going to just make you happy,
and it's going to be the quality
connecting with other people,
being grateful for
what you do have,
and then having these tools such
as yoga and meditation so that
you cultivate being present
and then also non-reactivity,
because your mind is built to--
you're basically a
bundle of reactions
waiting for stimuli, which is--
you know, if you see one thing,
you're going to be like--
you'll have this reaction to it.
So what I'm trying to do
is get people to just tune
into their breath, be
in the present moment,
and explore their prejudices and
own them and say, like, yeah,
this happened to me, I was
traumatized, and I'm safe now.
So I don't need that
defense mechanism
of being this other thing.
So as you know in the book,
I break down authenticity
into attachment, atonement,
attunement, presence,
and congruence.
So attachment is knowing
your attachment dynamic,
knowing that if you've had
five failed relationships
and this particular thing
always happens, you're there.
You're contributing
to that happening.
That's your-- that's a
ramification of your way
of believing that the universe
is either abundant and full
of love and full of grace or
you have to hoard and you have
to be suspicious
of other people,
because if you turn
your back, they'll--
you.
You know, you have a
basic underlying paradigm,
so you should know
your attachment dynamic
because that-- you can then
think of how you are showing up
in the world.
And then atonement
is at onement.
You're basically a child of God.
You're whole, and
you're perfect.
And there's room
for improvement,
meaning that you have this
ego which has been tempered,
let's say, or colored by your
parents, who your soul chose,
and then reading the
newspaper and going to schools
and having all this
pressure on you.
So for atonement, you
just need to forgive.
You have to forgive
unequivocally, because those--
any time you don't forgive,
that is your desire
to share your suffering.
As a species, we enjoy--
and I say that sadly.
But if you look at
the Middle East,
let's say, we enjoy paying
our suffering forward.
There's drones killing people
in Afghanistan on my behalf
today, right?
Those people-- I don't
know if they're with ISIS
or the Taliban or whatever.
But we pay our
suffering forward.
It's our mentality as
opposed to figuring out
what those people want and
what we want and saying,
how can we make this
a win-win situation.
We're saying, you killed my son.
I need to know that
you know how bad you
made me feel by killing my son,
so I have to kill your son.
That's the Code of Hammurabi.
That's our entire legal system.
And instead, it's
only going to change
when some brave mother-- and
it happens occasionally--
in Israel or
Palestine says, no, I
am not going to pay
my suffering forward.
I am going to choose love.
I'm going to choose
skillful solutions.
I'm going to hug
that woman and not
make sure that I make
her feel my suffering.
It's absurd when you think about
it, and yet our world functions
on this notion of
justice, which means
I have to kill your family.
That's insane.
So forgiveness--
>> Let's stay on that point.
How does that work to a father
that abused you or to others?
The same?
Do you have to forgive
them as opposed to sort
of carrying that suffering
forward and doing it--
>> I know, I know.
>> No.
Is that what you're saying?
>> Yeah, 100%.
>> Instead of carrying
that suffering forward
and psychologically or
subconsciously abusing your own
child with that language--
>> Right, exactly.
>> Can you cover that as
well before your next point?
>> Yeah, please.
So you can't change the past.
If your parents had
blunt tools, you
have to say they did the best
they could with the tools
that they had.
And you have to
understand, there's
very few parents
who are sociopaths.
They just-- they're going
through their stuff.
They have poor tools.
And then they take it out on
our kids in some ways, right?
But for us, our
generation, we just
have to say they did
the best they could.
And as I said, they--
the real healing comes
when they come to us
at some point in time--
maybe on their
death bed or-- and
they say, I could
have loved more.
That's when the healing
comes, when you have that
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and you
come together and you realize
that you were part of this thing
and you have a good life now
and you just have
to accept, really,
everything that you've
gone through because having
an adverse relationship with
reality is only hurting you.
I mean, that's the insanity
of the human condition,
the consciousness, the mind
trying to change the past.
Trying to shove that square
peg into a round hole
causes our own suffering.
So forgiveness-- and yes,
it's a hard pill to swallow.
If it's too close to the trauma,
if something terrible happened
yesterday, it's hard for me
to be like, OK, I'm going to--
what do I have to
learn from this?
How did I show up?
How did I bring
this onto myself?
Why was I there?
Why did that car
just come into me?
And this happened to me
September 4th last year.
I was just driving
down the road.
Someone came across five lanes
of traffic, turned towards me,
hit the gas.
I had brand new car.
It's a Honda Civic--
blew the whole thing up, right?
I'm sitting there,
and I had to check--
you know, there's
people coming over,
and I had to check to see
if my legs were still there
because I was not in shock.
I mean, I was conscious.
But I had the airbag blow up.
And have you ever had
an airbag blow up?
It's like being
shot in the chest.
It's insane.
And it saved my life.
I'd be dead right now, right?
So-- but if you're
a small person
and an airbag hits you in
the face, you're gone, right?
So I'm a big person.
The airbag hits me
in the chest, but it
knocks the wind out of me.
I'm bruised.
I'm all-- there's blood
all over the place, right?
And so obviously I have
PTSD from the car accident
33 years ago, and I'm
just doing this body scan,
and I'm breathing, and
I'm like, OK, am I--
will I live through this?
What is damaged-- like, this
whole thing that's going on.
And at the end of the
day, the other guy--
I don't know what happened-- had
an epileptic fit or something.
He didn't wake up in
the morning and say,
you know what, I'm going
to swerve into traffic
and try to kill some long-haired
Jew at 3:15 this afternoon.
Like, he didn't have the
intention of doing that.
So you just have to forgive.
This was an accident.
It's a car accident.
It's car accident.
That's the language.
It's an accident.
There's no intentionality
behind it, right?
These things happen.
And whatever can inspire
people to forgive and not pay
their suffering forward
is what we need to teach.
>> The first step was--
>> Attachment--
>> Attachment, then atonement.
>> Atonement.
Attunement is-- so
I write in the book,
"mirror neurons don't
fire via text message."
We delude ourselves
into thinking
we're connecting with other
people through our devices.
We need this.
So Carl Rogers was a
psychologist in the 1950s,
and he taught that
psychotherapists
create a safe space
to enable clients
to re-parent themselves.
So the other component
that's really
interesting about parenting
is that if something
goes wrong in a household,
whether it's a mother
having a migraine or
the parents fighting
or things like that, children,
up until a certain age,
assimilate that is there must be
something wrong with me, right?
So we have this epidemic in
our culture of low self-esteem,
low self-worth.
And for me, its
roots are in the fact
that we have to figure out
another way of interacting
with young people so that they
don't assimilate the world's
trauma as, if I were perfect,
then mommy and daddy wouldn't
have gotten divorced, because
it's just how our minds work,
right?
And then it shows up
later as I'll only
be happy when I'm president.
I'll only be happy
when I'm married.
when I'm divorced.
I'll only be happy--
and this whole thing.
No.
This is what you have.
You have the present moment.
If you're not happy
now, I could walk out
into the street in two
minutes and be hit by a car.
That's my life.
This is the present moment.
This is a gift.
You have this.
We're here today.
We have enough
food to eat, and I
get to hang out
with you guys, and I
took a-- you went into
the ocean this morning.
That's amazing.
I went to a boxing class.
I'm 53 years old.
I started taking boxing
lessons last week.
I'm terrible.
It's so exciting.
It's exciting because I--
to think, like,
OK, move this hip
and move this and
breathe out and that's
this and to learn something new.
I've never boxed before.
I bought boxing gloves.
It's exciting.
I'm terrible.
I'm the worst.
There's little people in the
room who could just kill me.
And to me, that's exciting.
So I like learning, so I'll
put myself in new situations.
So attachment,
atonement, attunement,
connecting with other people--
just learning how to
reflect their facial
affect back to them.
So it's a weird
thing in our culture.
Some people are taught to smile.
They walk into the room, and
they're like this or something.
But we really have
to carve out time--
and it could be in psychotherapy
or it could be with your wife
or with your kids or
somebody-- where people just
validate your
emotional experience,
because a lot of what goes on
in our society is invalidation.
It's not intentional.
But when I go on into Whole
Foods and I'm trying to buy
something and the kids are
on text message and I'm--
I'm just sitting
there like, I thought
that this was going to
be a loving interaction.
I need to get this ice cream
and go home and eat it now,
and you're not paying
attention to me.
And there's these
subconscious things
that go on that affect us,
whether it's not getting 30
likes on your Instagram post--
I just got a buddy onto
Instagram, and he's--
it's, like, three days,
and he's addicted.
He's 60 years old, and
it's like this new thing.
He's like a little baby.
He's like, oh, I only got
eight likes on that one.
I said, what are
you doing, you know?
You're measuring your
life by these things?
So attuning to other people and
really showing up so that we
cannot feel crazy--
because if you just sit
there with your own thoughts
and don't have the facial
recognition of what we're
doing now-- like, right,
wow, that's challenging
or, wow, that's really
exciting, you know?
That makes you feel comfortable
with your own emotional
experience of the world.
So that's why attunement
is so important.
And then the--
>> Can we speak on this point
to Marshall Rosenberg's work?
>> Oh yeah.
Fantastic.
>> I love that you brought
it up because to me--
actually, I found out about
nonviolent communication
through one of my mentors,
Laurentine's godfather, who
got it as part of
a reading book club
as part of a Siddhi
yoga group, right?
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> And so we--
I got recommended it.
I read it.
And it came at a
really important time,
because in life, you're always
surrounded by people going
through challenge, whether it's
your parents, employees, team,
loved ones, whatever.
And I found that I was being
very unemotionally available
or not as emotionally available
as I could be in the language
that I used, in the
way that I listened.
And this book
changed everything,
and I think it speaks
to the atonement period
because it helps you
validate and just let
them express their emotions,
and that's part of the healing,
right?
So how does this work?
>> And I'll say that as a man
we're basically built to fix
shit.
So a woman comes
home and she says,
oh, this happened and that
happened and this happened
and then Joan went to the
cooler and then Bob did this
and whatever.
And you or I are like, you tell
Joan that-- and you do this.
And a woman just hears
that as criticism,
and then you don't
have sex for a month,
and then nobody's happy.
And so we really need
to teach attunement.
And for men-- the
Marshall Rosenberg,
the nonviolent communications--
it's removing blame.
So you're owning your
own emotional experience.
And if you do that
in a vulnerable way
like I did when I
wrote that letter
to the driver of the car, if
you show up authentically,
you inspire people.
If I come-- if we go out
for coffee and I'm like,
James, I really want you to
be authentic with me today,
you're like, what?
You're not going to show
up and be like, yeah,
that's a good idea, right?
But if I sit here and I'm just
like, oh, man, my cat's sick
and this is a thing and I
show some kind of, like--
I'm not, like, this whatever--
it'll hopefully inspire you
to put a hand on my shoulder,
show up and just attune to
my emotional experience,
and then that validates it.
So the Marshall
Rosenberg I teach as--
we had in this country,
40 years ago, Mad Libs.
Did you ever have
that, Mad Libs?
It's like this--
you put in words.
There's a blank spot,
and there's sentences,
but there's blank
spots, and then
you put in adjectives
or nouns or things.
But it's basically "I
feel--" and the blank spot
is a feeling state--
"when--" and then
the next part--
the next blank spot
is an observation.
"I feel frustrated when
there are dishes in the sink
because I need--" and
then you put in a need--
"I need order in my life.
In the future--" and then you
put a request in-- "could you
please not have the
dishes in the sink?'
And instead of showing up
at home one night and just
going, dishes in the sink, man--
right?
And then the other
person's going
to be like, well, if
you don't like them,
then you should do them, right?
And it's a fight.
So you need to have
this language where
you enroll people in
having a conversation so
that it's a win-win situation.
People can show
up and they don't
have to be the bundle
of defense mechanisms.
They could say, OK, you're
showing up in a loving manner.
I want to show up
in a loving manner.
And let's make this
a win-win situation.
So I-- all those tools, the
reflective listening, Harville
Hendrix, Imago,
nonviolent communications,
Marshall Rosenberg,
and some of the things
from John Gottman's book
on the "Seven Principles
of a Highly
Successful Marriage,"
all that stuff--
any time you can
change your way of
phrasing something--
and I'll give you
my favorite one.
And this one is--
this one goes to the
forgiveness aspect also.
But someone taught me
years ago-- they said,
OK, try this phrase
out with this person
you're having a fight with.
Please forgive me
for not understanding
the way you choose to
show your love for me.
And then you shut
up indefinitely.
And it's basically-- it's
called a pattern interrupt,
because the person
expects you to blame them.
But if you say to
them, I know you
love me and you want
what's best for me,
but that really hurt my
feelings, that phrase--
particularly if you're having
some kind of contention,
something acrimonious--
if you can say,
please forgive me
for not understanding
the way you're
choosing to show your
love for me right now.
Again, we need to find--
we need to elevate our
discourse so that we inspire
the other person to show
up in a loving manner
because that's what
we really want.
But, instead, we
do this crazy thing
in our society, which
I call-- it's yes but.
So in my family
where I grew up, I
would say, look, the
sky's blue, and then
my grandma would be, yeah, but
it's going to rain tomorrow.
So-- I know, but that's--
because we're taught to try
to arrive at the truth.
But what we inadvertently do
with these phrases like "yes
but" is we invalidate the other
person's emotional experience.
So I had this one
person at Esalen,
and she had a
younger sister who--
it's such a beautiful story--
who hadn't found her way
yet and was kind of just
flopping about the house.
And I could tell already
that the way the older sister
was showing her love for her
was like, you should get a job.
You should go to school.
You should do this, whatever.
And the girl was just
thinking, I'm a piece of shit,
I'm a piece of shit, I'm a piece
of shit, I'm a piece of shit.
So I told her to say--
I told her, for the next
week, don't say "yes
but" whenever your younger
sister says anything.
Just change it to "yes and."
And I got to call
a week later, and--
that's the smallest thing,
just taking one word, "but,"
and changing it to "and,"
and it just totally
transformed the relationship.
>> Amazing.
Marshall's fantastic.
I love it.
And what does he say?
He says, don't put
a butt-- don't throw
a butt in front of a jackal.
You know how he does little
animals and everything?
>> I know, it's fantastic.
>> And I find I'm
doing it as well.
Like, I've got a
new 13-year-old son.
And he'll be like,
oh, look at that,
and I'm trying to prove
my intelligence to him.
Yeah, but this and
that and this and that.
I'm like, whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa, huh?
It's a wake-up call, but it's--
I love being triggered--
now I love being
triggered because I
get to see my own stupidity
and, in that process,
grow from that awareness.
>> I'm going to tell
you a funny story.
This is so embarrassing.
I was on a date with someone who
I really wanted to go on a date
with.
I had met her 30 years ago.
And her father's one
of my all-time heroes,
and it just-- it was
very exciting or whatnot.
And we sit down to dinner.
And for some-- because I
had to puff up my chest
because I am proud of the book,
you know, and all those things.
So I was just--
I nonchalantly-- she
knew I wrote the book,
but I nonchalantly mentioned it.
And she goes, did
you self-publish it?
And the date went tits
up, and it was awful.
And for the next hour--
I didn't realize this
till after the fact,
but I was trying
to justify my own--
because I took it
as such a slight,
and she probably didn't
mean it like that.
She didn't wake up in
the morning and say,
you know what I'm
going to do tonight?
I'm going to mess up--
I'm going to throw a monkey
wrench into Ira Israel's engine
by asking this question.
If she had said,
who's the publisher,
it wouldn't have affected
me like that at all.
But it put me on my hind
legs, and I was like--
because she could make
a phone call and get
a book published in a second
because of her family.
But for me, it basically took
15 years to get a publisher,
you know?
So it was just
like this-- it was
this hierarchical, subconscious
thing that happened.
I'm so embarrassed.
And I wanted to just
call her and say, like,
can I have another shot?
I was just put into
my pain body by you
asking this innocuous question.
I don't think you
meant to slight me.
A lot of famous people--
Stephen King
self-published his books.
But for me, I'm so proud that
I actually had a publisher
and it's Eckhart Tolle's
publisher and I'm-- whatever.
But the way the
question was phrased--
and it's so interesting.
You know, no one's immune.
You just have to really sit
there and tune in to the person
and think about, what
are they really saying?
And then when we're
speaking, we have
to be very conscious of
the way we phrase things.
So then the last
part-- attachment,
atonement, attunement,
presence, and congruence.
So presence is really simple--
yoga, meditation.
Depression relates to
thoughts about the past.
Anxiety relates to
thoughts about the future.
The past doesn't exist.
It's dead and gone.
The future doesn't exist.
It's just your expectations.
So how do depression
and anxiety exist?
So being in the present moment
and not allowing the prejudices
from the past to influence your
decisions or your expectations
or fears about the
future to influence
is essential to authentic,
loving relationships.
And then the last
part is congruence.
>> How do we do that?
How do we meditate?
To be present in
a relationship is
to listen well, to not solve
women's problems, which
I'm horrible at.
I mean, I get the list of
problems, and I'm solving them.
All right, we're going
to book this flight.
We're going to do this.
We're going to do that.
We're going to meet this person.
We're going to do-- it's
just like, no, just listen.
Understand the emotion.
It's profound, and it solves it.
You're like, whoa,
that's amazing.
How did that problem go away?
It screws with a guy's brain,
right, because he-- yeah.
>> That's great.
>> A guy is so practical.
I mean, I first started
getting insight into this
through David Deida, his
work, and he was just like,
they want to hug and
they want to be heard.
And then-- and the
nonviolent communication
was sort of the
book end of it where
it was like, OK,
that makes sense now,
and it gives you tools
to listen better.
Being present-- OK, so you
can do that through listening,
like you've spoken,
atonement, being
attuned to the other person.
But you're speaking
about meditation now.
What practice of
meditation do you use?
Is it mantra based?
Is it sitting in stillness?
Is it guided
visualization or whatever?
What do you prescribe?
What do you think
works best for people?
>> There are seven point some
odd billion people on planet
Earth.
There are seven points some
odd billion different types
of meditation.
For me, mantra
meditation gets me high.
That's-- and I go to various
gurus, and I'll sit with them.
And I don't advocate--
I don't think that the archetype
of guru is functional anymore.
But there are certain people--
I sit in their
presence-- that's what
the word "Upanishad" means,
and I love the Upanishad.
It's just sitting
in the presence.
And I feel happy.
When I sit with the
Dalai Lama and I
know what he bears and to
see his joy and the way
he's turned that around and
his love, I'm so inspired.
Like I-- you know, that--
so I always seek out--
whether I go to MOCA and look
at Rothkos or go to the symphony
and watch Gustavo
Dudamel conduct "Mahler."
All these people, all these
artists, all these writers
are seeking the same
thing in some ways, right?
So for me, I constantly--
I'm hungry for how
other people found
meaning in their
lives, constructed
loving relationships
and things like that.
So for me, I practice
mantra meditation.
But I teach
visualizations because I
want people to disidentify
with their thoughts.
So I'll give a visualization.
I mean, the most common is
the Buddhist one where you're
sitting at the edge of a river.
There's a tree off to
the side and a leaf falls
and whatever thoughts you have--
oh, I hope I didn't
get a parking ticket.
You put it on the leaf.
And you have something
called a mind screen, right?
And you watch the leaf
go down the stream.
And when the leaf exits your
mind screen, what you'll notice
is another thought
comes into my head.
What am I going to have
for dinner tonight, right?
And then you put it on.
So at the end of
that meditation,
I'll say, point to
the part of your body
that was watching your thoughts.
And some people point here, but
in Tibet, mind or heart-- mind
is here, right?
So all of our beliefs--
as I started this conversation
with Thomas Kuhn--
can be deconstructed.
But the fact of the matter
is that Descartes put us
on the wrong thread or path
when he said, "I think,
therefore I am."
We're addicted to thinking.
And our thoughts
are causing us--
they're encapsulating
the problems.
And then they're saying,
no, that's not a problem.
You suffer from
bipolar disorder.
That's the problem.
No.
You're responsible for your
own cognition in some ways.
If you're unhappy, think
better thoughts, right?
And that's what-- but that's
what the gratitude list is.
So being present, for me, means
cultivating non-reactivity.
You're sitting there,
and you're thinking--
you're not actually
thinking this,
but you're like, oh, you
know what happened today?
I woke up.
There was $125 charge on a
Shell station on my credit card,
and I knew that I didn't go
to that Shell station, right?
So I had to go through
this whole thing,
and my card was
obviously stolen.
There's all these tricks
that people do now.
But it was really interesting
to see the way I was like, OK--
I was just like, OK, this is
going to suck about a half
an hour of my life.
I just have to
figure out how to--
what's the most efficacious way
of canceling this credit card?
But yeah, you just--
that's it.
You just-- you accept that
these things happen, and you--
that's it.
It's over, you know?
So when you sit there
in the morning--
and I like to sit there.
What that does is it lets you
taste the nectar of the divine.
So yoga and meditation
were devised
to help you go to the other
side of your thoughts.
Deepak Chopra calls it
falling into the gap,
the gap between words.
Again, we're
addicted to language.
We're addicted to thinking.
And we have to be able to--
my favorite quote
from Marshall McLuhan
is, "I don't know
who discovered water,
but I doubt it was a fish."
So we're swimming in this
language and these emotions
and capitalism and our way
of being in the world and all
these things, and
they're contributing
to our stress and our
anxiety and as us showing up
like assholes and being
revengeful and starting
wars and these things.
And we have to be able
to sit there and just
tap in to what's underneath
all that craziness.
And for me, I sit
in the morning,
and then when my credit
card gets stolen or someone
cuts me off on the
road or someone
gives me the wrong
change, I don't
have to be insane and show up
in some way that's only going
to exacerbate the situation.
I can say, oh yeah, my
credit card got stolen.
It happened for.
It's going to happen again.
I have to spend half an hour on
the phone with Chase cancelling
the credit card.
Not going to ruin
my life, you know?
And I did it.
But we're very
reactive, and so we
have to cultivate
non-reactivity,
which is an art form, so
that we're not triggered
and that we learn
what our triggers are.
So observing our
thoughts, you sit there.
And Dan Harris has
that beautiful quote.
He says, "Meditation's
like being kidnapped
by the most boring
person on Earth,"
because if you sit there for
a half an hour in the morning,
you realize that your mind
has a default mechanism.
Mine's planning.
And Sharon Salzberg
says, "My mind
plans because it
makes me feel safe."
And maybe it's a Jewish thing.
I don't know.
But planning-- like,
OK, I have this list
and I'm going to do
this at 8 o'clock
and this happens
tomorrow morning.
And I'm making my
universe orderly.
So I think--
I mean, I'm not going to
give myself my own diagnosis.
But I think I plan because
there was a part of my life
where I was not in control.
And my mindset--
I'm never going to
let that happen again.
So my mind plans.
Interestingly-- so now when I
have people come into my office
and they have OCD,
I'll sit them down
and I'll do a little
meditation and I'll
say, OK, this behavior that
you're now calling whatever
you're calling, at
some point in time,
it was a solution to a problem
for your seven-year-old mind
or your nine-year-old
or your 10-year-old mind
thought, oh, if I just binge
and purge, then x will happen.
I solved the problem.
Now you're 35.
You're bingeing and purging.
You're unhealthy.
Let's look at what your mind
was trying to solve then.
For me, the narrative
that I've constructed
is, when I was in
traction, it was
kind of humiliating
to have to have
somebody do the bedpan
and all these things.
And my mind said, I'm going to
never let that happen again,
so I'll create order in my life
by making lists and planning
and doing these things.
And then when I'm sitting there
meditating and I catch myself--
and it's insane.
You just realize
that this is, like--
the world's going to show up
the way it's going to show up
no matter what I plan, right?
But my mind makes--
it feels this sense of ease by
having these-- like, OK, well,
if this happens, that'll
happen, and then I'll do this
and then I'll say this.
And I'll have these
fictitious conversations.
And then I look at myself
having these conversations that
are never going to take place.
And I'm like, this is insane.
Why don't you just go meditate?
It's going to be a
lot more pleasing.
And then I get back
to the meditation.
And so, for me, we're
cultivating non-reactivity
because we have this
default mechanism,
this way of being in the world.
We're always
preparing for things
and we're trying to
do things and whatnot.
And we just have
to be able to be
in the present
moment as our highest
self without the influences
from our society and all
these crazy desires that
we think will make us happy
if we attain--
and just.
>> Beautiful.
Was that the last one?
>> No, the last
one is congruence,
and it starts with this
beautiful quote by Andr Gide,
who said, "It is better to be
hated for what you are than
to be loved for
what you are not."
So for me, again,
congruence is a privilege
to live in such a
WEIRD wealthy society
where you and I get to say, I
want to be a psychotherapist,
and I go to school, and I
become a psychotherapist,
and I am able to earn my
living helping other people,
or I want to be a writer.
And then you create your
life around your vocation.
So "voco" in Latin
means calling, right?
So the universe is giving
us information all the time.
And we just have to
sit down and meditate
and say, what does this mean?
And then you use your best
inferences to say, oh,
I shouldn't be working
flipping pizzas.
I love this.
And then you create your
life so that you can do that.
And that's what I hope
that my classes and my book
and the DVDs and
everything inspire people
to do, because anything
that you do for money,
you're a prostitute, right?
And in our country,
all my friends,
they have golden handcuffs.
I'm 53 years old.
If you started working in
1988 when you were my age,
you make millions
of dollars a year.
And there's a lot of my friends
who feel, oh, well, my kid--
this costs this much, and
the mortgage costs this much.
They hate their jobs.
They hate their lives.
And they're trapped.
That's what a golden
handcuff is, right?
So at some point
in time, you have
to sit down and say, what's
going to make me happy,
and figure it out and find
your vocation, your calling.
What is the universe telling
you that you should be doing?
And it's not making money.
It's not exerting
power over people.
It's being of service.
It's being your nature,
which is Buddha nature, which
is pure love, you know?
Show up that way.
Inspire other people to do that.
And let's make the
world a better place.
>> Amazing.
What would be your
sort of message
for the people
listening to this,
watching this, hearing from you?
You know, you've got a very
unique range of studies.
But if there is some
sort of final message
you want to leave for people,
I'd love to hear that now.
>> Abraham Maslow has
this incredible quote.
He says, "When the only
tool you have is a hammer,
every problem resembles a nail."
So I've been very
privileged post car accident
to travel around the
world and go to ashrams
and sit with really,
really smart people,
and I've aggregated
a set of tools.
And I know the ones
that work for me,
and I don't proselytize.
What I do is I share tools.
And I say, why
don't you try this?
Why don't you try that?
Why don't you try surfing?
I've never surfed in my life.
I'll send people to
surfing lessons, you know?
But I know the things
that resonate with me
and make me happy, and
I love sharing them
with the people I love.
But when students
or patients come in,
I have to meet them
where they're at.
And I really--
I'm kind of proud of
that in some weird way,
because I don't--
you go to these
meditation classes,
and people are inflicting
types of meditation.
And as I said, there's seven
billion people on the planet.
Everybody has to find
what works for them.
And we should
realize that that's
a privilege because
we're not worried about,
am I going to live
through the rest of today?
That's an amazing privilege.
Most human beings that
walk the face of the Earth
never reach the age of 40.
So every day that I
wake up at 53, I'm like,
oh, this is gravy, man, or
this is great, you know?
I'll tell you, it's so
funny to me-- gratitude.
When I was 40 years
old, I bought a Vespa.
And there's a whole
psychological story about this
because my parents
forbade me to have one
because someone
else in the family
had gotten killed when I
was quite young, right?
But when I was 40--
and again, I wanted to
re-parent myself, right?
So I bought-- and I just--
it's kind of like
what I said before.
I started boxing lessons
last week, you know?
But that novelty, you know?
And I learned how to
ride a motorcycle.
I got my motorcycle
license, all these things.
And in Santa Monica, there's
these manicured streets
with palm trees, which are
not indigenous to California,
but there's these beautifully--
like, Paris is the intentional
city laid out by housemen,
and everything is
perfectly structured.
You can see from
one end to the other
and through this
monument and that tower.
It's amazing.
Santa Monica, I mean,
it's so beautiful.
I don't even know if people
who live here realize it.
There's trees of pine street--
there's streets of pine trees.
There's streets of
palm trees and whatnot.
So for me, when I--
coming here, riding my Vespa
down these beautiful streets,
I'm just like, this is amazing.
This is amazing that
I get to do this.
You know, I could've
been killed 33 years ago.
I could be killed yesterday.
I could be killed
this afternoon.
Just me with my face and
the wind coming across it
and just looking at
this beautiful thing
and the blue sky, I
mean, it's a miracle.
>> I love it.
Beautiful.
Thank you, Ira.
I'm excited for as
many people as possible
to hear your incredible message.
>> Well, thanks for
allowing me the opportunity.
>> And yeah, you're a gentleman
and a scholar and you've got
a lot of important things
to share in this world.
So I appreciate your time today.
>> Same to you.
Thank you very much.
[MUSIC PLAYING]